"INTRODUCTION:OF PESSIMISM AND PARADOX":
In his study The Nature of Evil (1931), Radoslav A. Tsanoff cites a terse
reflection set down by the German philosopher Julius Bahnsen in 1847,
when he was seventeen years old. “Man is a self-conscious Nothing,”
wrote Bahnsen. Whether one considers these words to be juvenile or
precocious, they belong to an ancient tradition of scorn for our species
and its aspirations. All the same, the reigning sentiments on the human
venture normally fall between qualified approval and loud-mouthed
braggadocio. As a rule, anyone desirous of an audience, or even a place in
society, might profit from the following motto: “If you can’t say
something positive about humanity, then say something equivocal.”
Returning to Bahnsen, he grew up to become a philosopher who not only
had nothing either positive or equivocal to say about humanity, but who
also arrived at a dour assessment of all existence. Like many who have
tried their hand at metaphysics, Bahnsen declared that, appearances to the
contrary, all reality is the expression of a unified, unchanging force—a
cosmic movement that various philosophers have characterized in various
ways. To Bahnsen, this force and its movement were monstrous in nature,
resulting in a universe of indiscriminate butchery and mutual slaughter
among its individuated parts. Additionally, the “universe according to
Bahnsen” has never had a hint of design or direction. From the beginning,
it was a play with no plot and no players that were anything more than
portions of a master drive of purposeless self-mutilation. In Bahnsen’s
philosophy, everything is engaged in a disordered fantasia of carnage.
Everything tears away at everything else … forever. Yet all this
commotion in nothingness goes unnoticed by nearly everything involved
in it. In the world of nature, as an instance, nothing knows of its
embroilment in a festival of massacres. Only Bahnsen’s self-conscious
Nothing can know what is going on and be shaken by the tremors of
chaos at feast.
As with all pessimistic philosophies, Bahnsen’s rendering of existence as
something strange and awful was unwelcome by the self-conscious
nothings whose validation he sought. For better or worse, pessimism
without compromise lacks public appeal. In all, the few who have gone to
the pains of arguing for a sullen appraisal of life might as well never have
been born. As history confirms, people will change their minds about
almost anything, from which god they worship to how they style their
hair. But when it comes to existential judgments, human beings in general
have an unfalteringly good opinion of themselves and their condition in
this world and are steadfastly confident they are not a collection of self-
conscious nothings.
Must all reproof of our species’ self-contentment then be renounced? That
would be the brilliant decision, rule number one for deviants from the
norm. Rule number two: If you must open your mouth, steer away from
debate. Money and love may make the world go round, but disputation
with that world cannot get it to budge if it is not of a mind to do so. Thus
British author and Christian apologist G. K. Chesterton: “You can only
find truth with logic if you have already found truth without it.” What
Chesterton means to say here is that logic is irrelevant to truth, because if
you can find truth without logic then logic is superfluous to any truth-
finding effort. Indeed, his only motive for bringing logic into his
formulation is to taunt those who find logic quite relevant to finding truth,
although not the kind of truth that was pivotal to Chesterton’s morale as a
Christian.
Renowned for stating his convictions in the form of a paradox, as above,
Chesterton, along with anyone who has something positive or equivocal
to say about the human race, comes out on top in the crusade for truth.
(There is nothing paradoxical about that.) Therefore, should your truth run
counter to that of individuals who devise or applaud paradoxes that stiff
up the status quo, you would be well advised to take your arguments, tear
them up, and throw them in someone else’s garbage.
To be sure, though, futile argumentation has its attractions and may act as
an amusing complement to the bitter joy of spewing gut-level
vituperations, personal idolatries, and rampant pontifications. To absolve
such an unruly application of the rational and the irrational (not that they
are ever separable), the present “contrivance of horror” has been anchored
in the thesis of a philosopher who had disquieting thoughts about what it
is like to be a member of the human race. But too much should not be
telegraphed in this prelude to abjection. For the time being, it need only
be said that the philosopher in question made much of human existence as
a tragedy that need not have been were it not for the intervention in our
lives of a single, calamitous event: the evolution of consciousness—
parent of all horrors. He also portrayed humanity as a species of
contradictory beings whose continuance only worsens their plight, which
is that of mutants who embody the contorted logic of a paradox—a real-
life paradox and not a bungled epigram.
Even an offhand review of the topic will show that not all paradoxes are
alike. Some are merely rhetorical, an apparent contradiction of logic that,
if well juggled, may be intelligibly resolved within a specific context.
More intriguing are those paradoxes that torture our notions of reality. In
the literature of supernatural horror, a familiar storyline is that of a
character who encounters a paradox in the flesh, so to speak, and must
face down or collapse in horror before this ontological perversion—
something which should not be, and yet is. Most fabled as specimens of a
living paradox are the “undead,” those walking cadavers greedy for an
eternal presence on earth. But whether their existence should go on
unendingly or be cut short by a stake in the heart is not germane to the
matter at hand. What is exceedingly material resides in the supernatural
horror that such beings could exist in their impossible way for an instant.
Other examples of paradox and supernatural horror congealing together
are inanimate things guilty of infractions against their nature. Perhaps the
most outstanding instance of this phenomenon is a puppet that breaks free
of its strings and becomes self-mobilized.
For a brief while, let us mull over some items of interest regarding
puppets. They are made as they are made by puppet makers and
manipulated to behave in certain ways by a puppet master’s will. The
puppets under discussion here are those made in our image, although
never with such fastidiousness that we would mistake them for human
beings. If they were so created, their resemblance to our soft shapes
would be a strange and awful thing, too strange and awful, in fact, to be
countenanced without alarm. Given that alarming people has little to do
with merchandising puppets, they are not created so fastidiously in our
image that we would mistake them for human beings, except perhaps in
the half-light of a dank cellar or cluttered attic. We need to know that
puppets are puppets. Nevertheless, we may still be alarmed by them.
Because if we look at a puppet in a certain way, we may sometimes feel it
is looking back, not as a human being looks at us but as a puppet does. It
may even seem to be on the brink of coming to life. In such moments of
mild disorientation, a psychological conflict erupts, a dissonance of
perception that sends through our being a convulsion of supernatural horror.
A sibling term of supernatural horror is the “uncanny.” Both terms are
pertinent in reference to nonhuman forms that disport human qualities.
Both may also refer to seemingly animate forms that are not what they
seem, as with the undead—monstrosities of paradox, things that are
neither one thing nor another, or, more uncannily, and more horrifically
supernatural, things that are discovered to be two things at once. Whether
or not there really are manifestations of the supernatural, they are
horrifying to us in concept, since we think ourselves to be living in a
natural world, which may be a festival of massacres but only in a physical
rather than a metaphysical purport. This is why we routinely equate the
supernatural with horror. And a puppet possessed of life would exemplify
just such a horror, because it would negate all conceptions of a natural
physicalism and affirm a metaphysics of chaos and nightmare. It would
still be a puppet, but it would be a puppet with a mind and a will, a human
puppet—a paradox more disruptive of sanity than the undead. But that is
not how they would see it. Human puppets could not conceive of
themselves as being puppets at all, not when they are fixed with a
consciousness that excites in them the unshakable sense of being singled
out from all other objects in creation. Once you begin to feel you are
making a go of it on your own—that you are making moves and thinking
thoughts which seem to have originated within you—it is not possible for
you to believe you are anything but your own master.
As effigies of ourselves, puppets are not equal partners with us in the
world. They are actors in a world of their own, one that exists inside of
ours and reflects back upon it. What do we see in that reflection? Only
what we want to see, what we can stand to see. Through the prophylactic
of self-deception, we keep hidden what we do not want to let into our
heads, as if we will betray to ourselves a secret too terrible to know. Our
lives abound with baffling questions that some attempt to answer and the
rest of us let pass. Naked apes or incarnate angels we may believe
ourselves to be, but not human puppets. Of a higher station than these
impersonators of our species, we move freely about and can speak any
time we like. We believe we are making a go of it on our own, and
anyone who contradicts this belief will be taken for a madman or
someone who is attempting to immerse others in a contrivance of horror.
How to take seriously a puppet master who has gone over to the other
side?
When puppets are done with their play, they go back in their boxes. They
do not sit in a chair reading a book, their eyes rolling like marbles over its
words. They are only objects, like a corpse in a casket. If they ever came
to life, our world would be a paradox and a horror in which everything
was uncertain, including whether or not we were just human puppets.
All supernatural horror obtains in what we believe should be and should
not be. As scientists, philosophers, and spiritual figures have testified, our
heads are full of illusions; things, including human things, are not
dependably what they seem. Yet one thing we know for sure: the
difference between what is natural and what is not. Another thing we
know is that nature makes no blunders so untoward as to allow things,
including human things, to swerve into supernaturalism. Were it to make
such a blunder, we would do everything in our power to bury this
knowledge. But we need not resort to such measures, being as natural as
we are. No one can prove that our life in this world is a supernatural
horror, nor cause us to suspect that it might be. Anybody can tell you
that—not least a contriver of books that premise the supernatural, the
uncanny, and the frightfully paradoxical as essential to our nature.

"THE NIGHTMARE OF BEING":
`Psychogenesis`
For ages they had been without lives of their own. The whole of their
being was open to the world and nothing divided them from the rest of
creation. How long they had thus flourished none of them knew. Then
something began to change. It happened over unremembered
generations. The signs of a revision without forewarning were being writ
ever more deeply into them. As their species moved forward, they began
crossing boundaries whose very existence they never imagined. After
nightfall, they looked up at a sky filled with stars and felt themselves
small and fragile in the vastness. Soon they began to see everything in a
way they never had in older times. When they found one of their own
lying still and stiff, they now stood around the body as if there were
something they should do that they had never done before. It was then
they began to take bodies that were still and stiff to distant places so they
could not find their way back to them. But even after they had done this,
some within their group did see those bodies again, often standing silent
in the moonlight or loitering sad-faced just beyond the glow of a fire.
Everything changed once they had lives of their own and knew they had
lives of their own. It even became impossible for them to believe things
had ever been any other way. They were masters of their movements
now, as it seemed, and never had there been anything like them. The
epoch had passed when the whole of their being was open to the world
and nothing divided them from the rest of creation. Something had happened. They did
not know what it was, but they did know it as that which should not
be. And something needed to be done if they were to flourish as they
once had, if the very ground beneath their feet were not to fall out from
under them. For ages they had been without lives of their own. Now that
they had such lives there was no turning back. The whole of their being
was closed to the world, and they had been divided from the rest of
creation. Nothing could be done about that, having as they did lives of
their own. But something would have to be done if they were to live with
that which should not be. And over time they discovered what could be
done—what would have to be done—so that they could live the lives
that were now theirs to live. This would not revive among them the way
things had once been done in older times; it would only be the best they
could do.1
Ante-Mortem
For thousands of years a debate has been going on in the shadowy
background of human affairs. The issue to be resolved: “What should we
say about being alive?” Overwhelmingly, people have said, “Being alive
is all right.” More thoughtful persons have added, “Especially when you
consider the alternative,” disclosing a jocularity as puzzling as it is
macabre, since the alternative is here implied to be both disagreeable
and, upon consideration, capable of making being alive seem more
agreeable than it alternatively would, as if the alternative were only a
possibility that may or may not come to pass, like getting the flu, rather
than a looming inevitability. And yet this covertly portentous remark is
perfectly well tolerated by anyone who says that being alive is all right.
These individuals stand on one side of the debate. On the other side is an
imperceptible minority of disputants. Their response to the question of
what we should say about being alive will be neither positive nor
equivocal. They may even fulminate about how
objectionable it is to be alive, or spout off that to be alive is to inhabit a
nightmare without hope of awakening to a natural world, to have our
bodies embedded neck-deep in a quagmire of dread, to live as shut-ins in
a house of horrors from which nobody gets out alive, and so on. Now,
there are really no incisive answers as to why anyone thinks or feels one
way and not another. The most we can say is that the first group of
people is composed of optimists, although they may not think of
themselves as such, while the contending group, that imperceptible
minority, is composed of pessimists. The latter know who they are. But
which group is in the right—the existentially harrowed pessimists or the
life-embracing optimists—will never be resolved.
If the most contemplative individuals are sometimes dubious about the
value of existence, they do not often publicize their doubts but align
themselves with the optimist in the street, tacitly declaiming, in more
erudite terms, “Being alive is all right.” The butcher, the baker, and the
crushing majority of philosophers all agree on one thing: Human life is a
good thing, and we should keep our species going for as long as we can.
To tout the rival side of the issue is asking for grief. But some people
seem born to bellyache that being alive is not all right. Should they vent
this posture in philosophical or literary works, they may do so without
anxiety that their efforts will have an excess of admirers. Notable among
such efforts is “The Last Messiah” (1933), an essay written by the
Norwegian philosopher and man of letters Peter Wessel Zapffe (1899–
1990). In this work, which to date has been twice translated into
English,2 Zapffe elucidated why he saw human existence as a tragedy.
Before discussing Zapffe’s elucidation of human existence as a tragedy,
however, it may be useful to muse upon a few facts whose relevance will
become manifest down the line. As some may know, there exist readers
who treasure philosophical and literary works of a pessimistic, nihilistic,
or defeatist nature as indispensable to their existence,
hyperbolically speaking. Contrary by temperament, these
persons are sorely aware that nothing indispensable
to their existence, hyperbolically or literally speaking, must make its
way into their lives, as if by natural birthright. They do not think
anything indispensable to anyone’s existence may be claimed as a
natural birthright, since the birthrights we toss about are all lies
fabricated to a purpose, as any student of humanity can verify. For those
who have given thought to this matter, the only rights we may exercise
are these: to seek the survival of our individual bodies, to create more
bodies like our own, and to perish from corruption or mortal trauma.
This is presuming that one has been brought to term and has made it to
the age of being reproductively ready, neither being a natural birthright.
Stringently considered, then, our only natural birthright is a right to
die. No other right has ever been allocated to anyone except as a
fabrication, whether in modern times or days past.3 The divine right of
kings may now be acknowledged as a fabrication, a falsified permit for
prideful dementia and impulsive mayhem. The inalienable rights of
certain people, on the other hand, seemingly remain current: somehow
we believe they are not fabrications because hallowed documents declare
they are real. Miserly or munificent as a given right may appear, it
denotes no more than the right of way warranted by a traffic light, which
does not mean you have the right to drive free of vehicular
misadventures. Ask any paramedic as your dead body is taken away to
the nearest hospital.